---
title: ML Basics
layout: default
description: Exploring some of the fundamentals of ML so that I have a foundation to build upon.
---

# Basics of Machine Learning

Machine Learning (ML) is a subset of artificial intelligence that focuses on the development of algorithms that allow computers to learn from and make decisions based on data. Instead of being explicitly programmed to perform a task, a machine learning model uses patterns in data to make predictions or decisions.

## Basis of ML:

- **Data**: The foundation of any ML model. It can be labeled (for supervised learning) or unlabeled (for unsupervised learning).
- **Model**: The algorithm used to find patterns or relationships in the data.
- **Training**: The process of feeding data into a model to learn patterns.
- **Evaluation**: Assessing the model's performance using metrics like accuracy, precision, recall, etc.

## Types of ML:

- **Supervised Learning**: The model is trained on labeled data, meaning the data includes both input and the corresponding desired output.
- **Unsupervised Learning**: The model is trained on unlabeled data, trying to find patterns or relationships in the data without any predefined labels.
- **Reinforcement Learning**: The model learns by interacting with an environment and receiving feedback in the form of rewards or penalties.

## Machine Learning with Java

Java, being a versatile and widely-used programming language, offers a rich ecosystem for machine learning. Libraries such as Weka, Deeplearning4j, and MOA provide comprehensive tools and platforms for building ML models in Java.

## Applications:

- **Natural Language Processing (NLP)**: Java libraries like OpenNLP and Stanford NLP offer tools for tasks like tokenization, parsing, and named entity recognition.
- **Image Recognition**: Deeplearning4j supports deep learning models which can be used for tasks like image classification.
- **Financial Forecasting**: Java's robustness and performance make it suitable for predicting stock market trends or credit scoring.
- **Recommendation Systems**: Libraries like Apache Mahout allow for building recommendation engines using collaborative filtering.
